when Mark says human beings are creative
he means we we see something in the
world like a stick and we've got a
vision in our head of what we want to
turn that stick into we've got a vision
in our head of what we want the world to
look like so maybe I want to make a
spear I grab a sharp Rock I start
cutting away at the stick I Whittle out
away I slowly match what's in my head to
the physical reality of my world that's
what Marx meant by humans have a
creative nature and in that the the
deeper meaning of that is that when we
look into the
world we see ourselves
reflecting back at us we see our
creativity our subjective thoughts the
vision of my spear objectified in the
real world and what he said is we look
out into the world we're humanizing with
our creativity and it reflects back our
human nature and we see ourselves as
Gods essentially is what it comes down
to uh Mark said our species being is
also social that's our spiritual species
property to use his own terms and what
he means by that is we're not born in
the world alone we're not born in a
vacuum uh he said the tradition of all
dead Generations weighs like a nightmare
on the brains of the living meaning
we're born into a world that's already
been humanized we're born into a world
where other people have used their
creative potential to transform the
world into their Vision so in a sense
our conscious the burden of what has
been right yes exactly and do a little
hand gesture and uh right and a cackle
an evil cackle that like curls your
spine right and what freezes the blood
of small
children and what Mark said is because
we we've got this creative potential to
transform our world into our own vision
and we're a social creature uh what
those things differentiate us from the
animals and because we can do those
things we make history meaning when I'm
born I'm born into a world others have
worked on they've already transformed
nature if I'm born in a tri primitive
tribe I'm not going to be going and
creating a space fairing civilization so
the history of the people that have come
before me preloads my Consciousness and
that makes history and then the people
in my present my present tribe whatever
you want your your city those of us uh
attempting to send Rockets to Mars we
then socialize the Next Generation into
the world and Marx's whole theology is
the idea that we can arrest this process
of History we can direct it it's not
something that just has to happen and
it's incumbent on
those who are oppressed to arrest it
because the group in power who's created
the society uh with capitalism it would
be the Bourgeois and their private
property and the laws rules and
regulations that have been built up to
solidify their social status and their
domination they're not going to
overthrow history and direct history in
the direction we want it because they're
pretty set they're enjoying their lives
they're happy so it's incumbent on the
oppressed to become conscious of this
fact that we can arrest history and we
can direct it and that's Marx's program
the arresting of History through
conflict to drive it to an ultimate end
point one where we look out in the world
and it reflects our Humanity back onto
us we mark said
when we look into the world and we're
one with nature and nature is one with
us uh I think his precise words to
describe it in almost biblical terms was
he said that when man looks out and he
revolves around himself as his own true
son I mean it doesn't get any more
theological than that so I think that's
that's the heart of it and everything
derives from that it doesn't make sense
that it's an economic theory it never
has that's why over 100 million people
died starving to death in the dark
that's why it doesn't work because he
mapped his economics on top of a
theology to sell it is my opinion okay
okay so let's delve into the theological
side for a moment and then we'll return
to the postmodern
element okay so there's two things you
laid out as far as I I'm understanding
what you're say and the the first is
well the some support for your argument
that this is a theological movement is
that well it is a post-religious
movement and it's also something that n
predicted when he discussed the death of
God he said in the will to power that
the human race would run an experiment
in the 20th century that would likely
Doom millions of people to investigate
the validity of a resentment
predicated communism
and that if we learned the proper lesson
from that then perhaps the sacrifice of
lives will would have proved valuable
and necessary now you know that's a hell
of a harsh thing to say but it's also
quite the remarkable prediction and of
course dovi saw the same things coming
especially in his book demons which is
as accurate a PR droma to the gulag
archipelago as you could possibly hope
for
okay so let's look at this theologically
so because I think it is a theology it's
a post-christian theology no it's an
anti-christian Theology and so part of
the reason it's anti-christian is
because Marx's fundamental
presupposition is that the god of power
does and should
rule right so that's quite a that's
quite a claim and I think actually you
can understand the attractiveness of
that claim especially on the economic
side because the idea that those that
there is a small minority of people who
hold comparative power in any human
social hierarchy has is true in some
manner it's particularly true if the
society is
corrupt and it is also the case that
even the most benevolent of social
organizations are corrupted to some
degree by power and so power is a major
league go you might say and it's very
attractive intellectually especially if
you're a rather rigid reductionist and
you don't like to think in a
sophisticated manner is to reduce
everything to power as Fuko did power
and sexuality in fuko's case and you can
make a credible case for that you can
make a credible case that your
relationship with yourself is one of
power and your relationship with your
wife and your relationship with your
children and your so-called friends and
every economic relationship it's all
boils down to power and only the naive
think differently and so the world's a
war of power and that's not only an
anti-christian Doctrine in the most
fundamental way it's almost literally a
satanic Doctrine
because in the gospels for example
Christ is literally tempted by the Satan
who offers him power as an alternative
to the proper principle of sovereignty
okay so so that's the first thing is
marxis Marxism is a Theology of power
all right the next thing is is that you
pointed out was that
um it's a dialectic of oppressed versus
oppressor and so that's also interesting
theologically because the story of Cain
and Abel is an oppressor versus
oppressed Theology and the spirit of
Cain is the spirit of the resentful
oppressed who Rebels against the what
would you say the upward striving
individual who makes the proper
sacrifices destroys him and Rebels
against God pridefully and
deceitfully right so that's another
theological element now the marxists
would say
well religion Christianity is the opiate
of the masses and perhaps Cain under the
sway of the Lucifer who's regarded as an
admirable rebel by the marxists in
including marks is uh the upholder of
the proper revolutionary Spirit but it's
certainly the case that the notion that
existence itself history itself all
relationships are a battleground of
power between the oppressor and the
oppressed is Central to Marxism as far
as I'm concerned it's not a Marxist idea
and of itself but it's Central to
Marxism and it's also a pretty damn
salable idea especially if you if your
culture is corrupted by
power
and you have your self-serving reasons
for regarding yourself as victimized and
oppressed you know that was what n
objected to with regards to the
philosophy of resentment and Marx is
Marxism is the philosophy of resentment
WR large and the problem with that is
that there's a lot of things in life to
be resentful
about right so it's easy to sell it's
it's a doctrine that suits the
pathologically
immature and so okay so is there
anything in my characterization of
Marxism as a theology that's at odds
with the manner in which you're
construing it
[Music]